[general]
name=GeoSnag
qgisMinimumVersion=3.28
description=Standing dead trees on aerial orthophotos: one point per tree, then crowns grown from the points.
version=0.4.11
author=Igor Pawelec
email=igor.pawelec@urk.edu.pl
about=QGIS Processing provider for the pygeosnag Python package. "Detect dead trees" takes an RGB+NIR, CIR or RGB orthophoto and writes one point per standing dead tree with a confidence (adaptel micro-segmentation, a random forest trained with whole-crown labels on ten Polish forest sites, spectral means standardised within the scene, an optional stand mask, an optional cut on the object score). "Grow crowns" grows the points into crown polygons with seeded region growing on NDVI and lightness (a within-reach kernel, tolerance and radius from a benchmark on 1200 verified crowns). The algorithms stay in the packages; this plugin is glue. pygeosnag, pygeoadaptels and pygeopalette are bundled; numba, scipy, scikit-learn, joblib, rasterio, fiona and shapely are installed into the plugin's own libs folder on first run. The models are downloaded on first use from the pygeosnag GitHub release.
icon=icon.png
homepage=https://github.com/igorpawelec/qgis-geosnag
tracker=https://github.com/igorpawelec/qgis-geosnag/issues
repository=https://github.com/igorpawelec/qgis-geosnag
category=Analysis
tags=raster,dead trees,snags,forestry,remote sensing,orthophoto,segmentation,random forest,region growing
experimental=True
deprecated=False
changelog=0.4.11
    Grow crowns with band mode auto read a 3-band CIR orthophoto (NIR, R, G)
    as RGB and grew on weighted CIELAB instead of NDVI + lightness (seen on
    Ramsowo: "mode rgb ... space lab_w"). pygeosnag 0.4.2 shares the band
    sniff of Detect with Grow; the log now says "mode cir (auto: band 2 is
    the darkest ...)" for such a raster. Bundles pygeosnag 0.4.2.
    0.4.10
    Grow crowns: the tolerance now tapers with the distance from the seed
    (pygeosnag 0.4.1): 28 at the seed, 12 at the radius on NDVI + lightness.
    A flat tolerance could not serve both dense bark-beetle clusters (their
    bleached crowns want 25-30 near the seed) and sparse stands (anything
    above 15 at the radius spills into shadow). On 1200 verified crowns of
    8 sites: median IoU 0.70, 79% above 0.5 (0.4.9: 0.65, 72%); on the
    Gizycko clusters 0.56 (0.4.9: 0.48). New Advanced field: tolerance at
    the radius. Bundles pygeosnag 0.4.1.
    0.4.9
    Grow crowns gets a new default recipe (pygeosnag 0.4.0): the points grow
    on 100 x NDVI and CIELAB lightness (tolerance 20; weighted CIELAB with
    no NIR band) with pygeosnag's within-reach kernel, where a pixel goes to
    the seed within the radius and tolerance with the lowest path cost, in
    place of pygeoadaptels' global partition cut afterwards. On 1200
    verified crowns of 8 sites: median IoU 0.65, 72% of crowns above 0.5,
    against 0.53 and 54% before; on Gizycko's dense clusters 0.48 against
    0.34. New Advanced options: Feature space (auto, ndvi_L, lab_w, lab,
    raw) and Assignment rule (reach, partition); tolerance 0 and empty
    weights take the values of the chosen space. Bundles pygeosnag 0.4.0.
    0.4.8
    Grow crowns works tile by tile around the points (pygeosnag 0.3.4): no
    temporary CIELAB file, memory bounded by one tile, progress per tile,
    cancel works. A 796-megapixel orthophoto that failed writing the
    temporary file on the system drive now runs through. Bundles
    pygeosnag 0.3.4, pygeoadaptels 0.10.4.
    0.4.7
    Results are styled by Processing itself from QML files shipped with the
    plugin (RenderingStyles), not by plugin post-processors running on the
    GUI thread when the task completes -- where QGIS crashed with an access
    violation after Grow crowns on a 150-megapixel orthophoto (the output
    file was complete). No plugin code runs at task completion any more.
    0.4.6
    The bundled packages win over an older copy another plugin made
    importable first (GeoAdaptels + GeoPalette loads before this plugin and
    put its pygeoadaptels 0.10.3 on the path, so the 0.10.4 bundled here --
    Grow crowns no longer taking hours -- never ran). The log names the
    folder every package is executed from. Bundles pygeoadaptels 0.10.4.
    0.4.5
    Radiometry is off by default and labelled a rescue: on 200 scenes it
    saved 27 and broke 17. Bundles pygeosnag 0.3.3.
    0.4.4
    Radiometry (Advanced, default auto): a hazy or flat orthophoto is mapped
    per band onto the training range before segmentation; on such scenes
    the models saw nothing at all before. Bundles pygeosnag 0.3.2.
    0.4.3
    The dependency check no longer takes find_spec's word for it: it clears
    the import caches, and a package that imports is present. Every session
    used to re-run pip for scikit-learn and joblib that sat in libs/ and
    imported fine. When pip is still needed the log first says why each
    package was not importable.
    0.4.2
    A run now names the package versions it actually executes and refuses
    to run when the plugin was updated under a running QGIS (the session
    keeps the previous code in memory until a restart; a 0.4.1 session
    that still ran pygeosnag 0.3.0 read a CIR orthophoto as RGB).
    0.4.1
    Band mode auto now tells a CIR orthophoto from an RGB one (band 2 the
    darkest over the sampled pixels = NIR, R, G) and a NIR-first 4-band
    stack from R, G, B, NIR; the first log line names the decision. A
    CIR raster run as RGB found almost nothing. The packages line no
    longer reports the bundled copies as installed. Bundles pygeosnag 0.3.1.
    0.4.0
    Models assets-v2 (pygeosnag 0.3.0): whole-crown labels from ten sites;
    the RGB+NIR and CIR models score spectral means standardised within
    the scene (a first pass over 16 tiles; "Scene normalisation" under
    Advanced, leave it on auto); the dialog's threshold defaults to the
    models' operating point 0.7; an optional p_object cut under Advanced,
    the object forest now transferring to unseen scenes. The log names the
    models and their operating point. Bundles pygeosnag 0.3.0.
    0.3.4
    Result styling no longer leaks a post-processor per run: QGIS takes
    ownership of it, so the plugin keeps its own reference only on bindings
    that do not (verified against QGIS 3.44). Unrelated to the QGIS crash in
    on_complete, which was measured and is not caused by this plugin.
    0.3.3 -- the height gate takes the maximum within a radius (3 m) and defaults to 3 m: a ground separator, never crown evidence; radius under Advanced. Bundles pygeosnag 0.2.1.
    0.3.2 -- height gate: an optional canopy height model (or a surface and a terrain model under Advanced) drops points below 5 m -- bare ground, roads and stumps -- and writes height_m. Bundles pygeosnag 0.2.1.
    0.3.1 -- fixed a crash (access violation in on_complete) after a run on a full orthophoto with the probability raster requested: the raster was contrast-stretched with a cumulative cut, a full-pixel scan on the GUI thread while the task was being torn down. The probability raster now gets a fixed 0-1 pseudocolour and nothing is read in the completion handler.
    0.3.0 -- the product is a point per dead tree: "Detect dead trees" writes points (centroid of the merged adaptels, 3 m duplicate suppression), "Grow crowns" grows them with pygeoadaptels' seeded growing and the crown recipe. Score, extract and adapt are gone from the toolbox. Binary dependencies go into the plugin's own libs folder, never the user site. Bundles pygeosnag 0.2.0.
    0.1.2 -- a reinstalled zip no longer keeps running the previous zip's package code; a failed model download names the cache folder to copy the models into.
    0.1.1 -- five things on the Detect dialog, the rest under Advanced; the local models folder is remembered.
    0.1.0 -- first release.
